In assessing the economic outlook, economists cannot avoid confronting the question of how fast the economy can expand without creating upward pressure on inflation.
A fundamental determinant of the economy's potential growth is the sustainable rate of productivity expansion.
Critical though this issue is, it does not by itself capture the importance of productivity.
Besides influencing the near-term course of important economic variables, such as gross domestic product growth, inflation, and profits, productivity largely determines our society's long-term economic welfare.
Productivity growth forms the foundation for improvements in living standards.
And our ability to deal with budgetary challenges--such as funding the large future obligations of our Social Security and Medicare systems and, more generally, managing the nation's debt--depends critically on the future direction of productivity.
Thus, knowing where productivity growth is headed is, in many respects, equivalent to foreseeing our economic destinies.
In thinking about productivity in the future, it is useful to first consider how it has behaved in the distant past and more recently.
The past offers lessons about the kinds of economic and political environments that have proven most effective in fostering high rates of productivity growth.
And a better understanding of the forces shaping recent developments in productivity--in particular, the causes of the pickup in labor productivity growth that began in the mid-1990s and the sources of the additional post-2000 surge--can help us put sensible bounds on possible future movements in productivity.
In my discussion today, I will not attempt to predict these future movements, but with the knowledge gained from studying the past and the present, I will lay out some of the conditions--both favorable and unfavorable--that are likely to influence them.
As usual, my remarks represent my own views, which are not necessarily shared by other members of the Board of Governors or of the Federal Open Market Committee.
The Past 1 Over the past century and a half, three episodes stand out as especially relevant for assessing the sustainability of the current productivity boom: the late 1800s from roughly the end of the Civil War to around 1890; the decade or so between the end of World War I and the onset of the Great Depression; and the period from about 1950 to the early 1970s.
In these boom periods, average labor productivity growth ranged from 2-1/2 to 3-3/4 percent, about double the average of growth rates during other periods.
The striking similarities of these three episodes provide clues about the types of economic policies and other factors that have been important in promoting sustained productivity gains.
Perhaps not surprisingly, all three periods were influenced heavily by the introduction of new technologies.
But they were also characterized by important changes in the organization of production, in the means of financing new enterprises, and in investment in human capital that facilitated the complex process of applying these new technologies to the creation of new goods and more-efficient production processes.
The productivity boom after the Civil War resulted from a variety of technological advances, including the expansion of and improvements in the use of steam power, railroad transportation, and communication by telegraph.
By lowering the cost of transportation, railroad expansion allowed firms to take advantage of economies of scale in production and distribution.
The telegraph's lowering of communication costs enabled firms to better coordinate movements in rail traffic and made possible more-informed and better decisions in many other industries.
In the productivity boom that followed World War I, a chief technological innovation was the spread of electrification to the factory floor.
By allowing each machine to be driven by its own power source, electric motors spurred the development of complex and more-productive configurations of machinery, such as the assembly line.
Finally, the productivity gains of the 1950s and 1960s had their roots in a wide range of technological innovations made during the 1930s as well as in research sponsored by the military during World War II.
For example, research advances in polymer chemistry, the development of new diesel and jet engine technologies, and the invention of the transistor and the integrated circuit facilitated productivity improvements in a wide range of industries and the creation of an array of highly useful consumer products.
In each episode, businesses found that changes to their organizational structures allowed them to take greater advantage of the new possibilities opened up by these technological innovations.
In the productivity boom of the late nineteenth century, for example, the potential for economies of scale made possible by the new technologies led to dramatic increases in firm size in many industries.
Their larger size, in turn, prompted firms to implement hierarchical management systems to coordinate their greater numbers of workers and machinery and to speed the flow of information between management and the factory floor.
Shorter delivery times, reduced inventory holdings, and a better match between production and orders were the beneficial results.
Similarly, to take advantage of the continuous-processing technologies of the early 1900s, firms increased the scope of their operations, integrating forward into distribution and retailing and backward into materials processing.
This vertical integration reduced transaction costs but required the development of new units within the firm that were not directly tied to production, such as advertising, accounting, and research departments.
