During roughly the same period, equity valuations have risen, and term premiums for fixed-income assets have fallen.
The obvious question is whether these real economy and financial market phenomena are measurably related.
Put differently, has less-variable real activity helped increase the value of financial assets, as some have claimed?
It is certainly possible to see how such a link might occur.
If perceived to be persistent over sufficiently long periods of time, greater economic stability could support higher asset prices by reducing risk premiums on financial assets.
It is also plausible that more stability in output and inflation could lead to lower volatility in financial asset prices.
In my remarks today, I want to discuss what researchers are uncovering about the links between the volatility of real activity and asset prices.
As a monetary policy maker, I am interested in these links because the prices of financial assets affect the spending decisions of firms and households and because these prices may reveal forward-looking information relevant for setting policy.
In addition, I want to discuss changes in financial markets themselves that may contribute to asset price volatility.
Before proceeding, I must indicate that the views I am about to express are my own and do not necessarily reflect the views of other members of the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee.
The volatility of GDP has fallen while equity prices have risen A number of researchers have documented that the volatility of economic activity has moderated since the mid-1980s (Kim and Nelson, 1999; McConnell and Perez-Quiros, 2000).
Moreover, the decline does not appear to be the result of a long-term downward trend but appears to conform more to a structural break around the mid-1980s.
The moderation is substantial: The standard deviation of the quarterly growth rate of real gross domestic product from 1985 to 2004--about 2.1 percent--is only about one-half its standard deviation from 1960 to 1984.
Similar-sized declines in volatility have been evident in many of the components of GDP, including consumption and residential investment, and also in inflation.
Declines have also occurred in the volatility of business investment and corporate profits, but these declines have been more modest.
A variety of explanations for this Great Moderation have been put forth, and each has garnered some empirical support.
First, the U.S. economy might have been lucky, and the shocks to the economy have been milder than in the past (Stock and Watson, 2002; Ahmed, Levin and Wilson, 2004).
Another explanation is that firms may have adopted information technologies that allow them to more efficiently manage their inventories (Kahn, McConnell, and Perez-Quiros, 2002), thus limiting destabilizing imbalances and rectifying them more quickly when they arise.
Better conduct of monetary policy could also lead to lower inflation and economic volatility (see, for example, Clarida, Gali, and Gertler, 2000; and Romer and Romer, 2002).
Finally, financial innovations, such as risk-based loan pricing and expanded securitization, may have enhanced the ability of households to borrow, which would make them less sensitive to fluctuations in income (Dynan, Elmendorf, and Sichel, 2005).
Importantly, equity valuation, as measured by the price-earnings ratio of the S&P 500, has been higher in the past two decades than in the two decades before that.
The price-earnings ratio averaged 14 from 1960 to 1984 and rose to an average of 19 over 1985-2004.
The average since 1984 falls only slightly, to 18, if we exclude the late 1990s and 2000, when valuations reached record levels.
The rise in equity valuations at the same time that macroeconomic volatility fell is circumstantial evidence of a link between the two.
Interest rates also could potentially have been affected by the Great Moderation.
Investors in Treasury bonds require a risk (or term) premium to compensate them for the risk of loss on longer-maturity bonds resulting from movements in interest rates.
Term premiums could be lower when inflation expectations are well anchored or the macroeconomy is less volatile.
Ongoing research by Board staff suggests a notable downward trend in term premiums since 1990 (Kim and Wright, 2005).
This secular decline in term premiums since 1990 appears to be correlated with the decline in long-run inflation uncertainty and in short-term interest rate uncertainty.
Does volatility of real activity affect the level of asset prices?
Now, I would like to explore some of the research that might explain whether and, if so, how the Great Moderation affected the level of asset prices.
Structural models of asset prices provide a consistent framework for understanding both equity prices and interest rates.
In these models, each asset price contains a risk premium that represents the additional return demanded by risk-averse investors for bearing risk.
A reduction in macroeconomic volatility that reduces uncertainty about earnings or dividends could reduce the equity risk premium and, as a result, lead to higher equity prices.
Less uncertainty about future inflation could lower the risk premiums on nominal Treasury bonds, lowering the risk-free interest rate.
There is, however, a potential offset as well.
Lower volatility may reduce the motive for precautionary savings and thus put upward pressure on interest rates and, all else equal, downward pressure on equities.
One recent paper has directly examined whether the recent decline in economic volatility contributed to a lower long-run equity premium and the steep run-up in stock prices in the late 1990s (Lettau, Ludvigson, and Wachter, 2005).
This model supposes that investors learn about the new, low-volatility regime only gradually.
The researchers estimate that investors revised up the probability of being in a low-volatility regime starting in the early 1990s.
This revision, if perceived to be persistent, could explain the magnitude of the decline in the long-run equity premium in the late 1990s.
However, one concern that has been raised about this model is that it does not also address the behavior of interest rates over the past decade.
