Unlike programs passed two or three decades ago on behalf of the Lockheed and Chrysler corporations, these new programs are open to all qualifying companies within the specified industries.
Companies can apply for a loan guarantee that covers most of the loan amount, usually in the range of 80 percent to 90 percent.
In each of these four new programs, the Congress has created a board to judge the applications, and the boards have in turn hired a staff and outside consultants to analyze these applications and make recommendations on whether the specific applications should be approved.
Because the programs involve credit markets, a Federal Reserve Board delegate has been appointed to the loan guarantee boards, and I have been that delegate for each of the four boards.
Though political motives undoubtedly are involved in the creation of loan guarantee programs, an economic rationale could be involved as well.
Some social value, which private credit markets may undervalue, may exist in keeping alive particular firms or in financing particular services of ongoing firms.
For example, a loan applicant might provide essential consumer services, add to competition in certain markets, or employ resources that would otherwise be unemployed in the short run.
The supply of credit to an entire industry could at times be temporarily interrupted, through no fault of the industry, as is perceived to have happened for airlines after September 11, 2001.
To the extent that keeping alive such services, firms, or firms in such industries has social value--a matter that many economists would view with pronounced skepticism--there could be a rationale for a loan guarantee program to facilitate the supply of the missing credit.
Merely stating these possible rationales suggests how difficult it might be to tailor a loan guarantee program to deal with them.
Affirmative loan guarantee decisions should be justified either by nonmarket benefits for consumers or producers or by credit market disruptions.
Ideally these benefits should outweigh taxpayers' opportunity cost of supplying the funds, called the net credit subsidy cost of the guarantee.
Although the temptation will be there, decisions should not be made on the basis of political influence.
Given these considerations, it makes sense to empower a board with the ability to sponsor the required analyses and with some insulation from the normal political lobbying process to judge the applications.
The Congress in fact did set up these programs and create these boards.
We at the Fed did participate in their administration.
This talk reports on these four boards, from a personal perspective.
I stress that I am speaking for myself and not for congressional decisionmakers, other members of the loan guarantee boards, or the Federal Reserve Board.
