Montagu Norman, the Governor of the Bank of England for a quarter of a century after the First World War and a highly influential figure in his time in central banking circles, was notorious for his reclusiveness, both personal and professional.
According to his biographer, Norman lived by the maxim, "Never explain, never excuse" (Boyle, 1967, p. 217).
Norman was hardly unique.
Central bankers long believed that a certain "mystique" attached to their activities; that making monetary policy was an arcane and esoteric art that should be left solely to the initiates; and that letting the public into the discussion would only usurp the prerogatives of insiders and degrade the effectiveness of policy.
In contrast to this tradition of secrecy, central banks around the world have become noticeably more open and transparent over the past fifteen years or so.
Policymaking committees have adopted various mechanisms to enhance their communication with the public, including more informative policy announcements, post-meeting press conferences, expanded testimony before the legislature, the release of the minutes of policy meetings, and the regular publication of reports on monetary policy and the economy.
This increased openness is a welcome development, for many reasons.
Perhaps most important, as public servants whose policy actions affect the lives of every citizen, central bankers have a basic responsibility to give the public full and compelling explanations of the rationales for those actions.
Besides satisfying the principle of democratic accountability, a more open policymaking process is also likely to lead to better policy decisions, because engagement with an informed public provides central bankers with useful feedback in the form of outside views and analyses.
Yet another benefit of full and timely release of information about policy decisions and their rationales is a reduced risk that market-sensitive information will dribble out through inappropriate channels, giving unfair advantage to some financial market participants.
Admittedly, for many central banks, including the Federal Reserve, progress toward greater transparency has come in halting steps and not without trepidation.
For example, the decision to announce changes in the target for the federal funds rate immediately after meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) was implemented only in phases and after considerable soul-searching by FOMC members.
In retrospect, however, I think that most central bankers, both in the United States and abroad, would agree that greater openness has been beneficial to central banks as institutions and for the advancement of their policy objectives.
Although the presumption today is that--absent compelling reasons to the contrary--central banks should strive for transparency, some basic questions about what, how, and to what end central banks should communicate with the public remain decidedly open.
In my talk today I will put aside broader considerations such as democratic accountability and consider these questions as they bear on the ability of central banks to make monetary policy more effective and to improve macroeconomic performance.
Before proceeding, I should emphasize that the views I will express today are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Why Central Bank Communication Matters for Policy Effectiveness Can central bank talk--Fedspeak, in the vernacular of the U.S. media and financial markets--make monetary policy more effective and improve economic outcomes?
To see why communication may be an integral part of good monetary policymaking, recall that the Federal Reserve directly controls only a single short-term interest rate, the overnight federal funds rate.
Relative to the enormous size of global financial markets, the market for federal funds--the market in which commercial banks borrow and lend reserves on a short-term basis--is insignificant.
Control of the federal funds rate is therefore useful only to the extent that it can be used as a lever to influence more important asset prices and yields--stock prices, government and corporate bond yields, mortgage rates--which in turn allow the Fed to affect the overall course of the economy.
Of course, basic financial theory implies that a link does exist between short-term interest rates, such as the federal funds rate, and longer-term rates, such as Treasury bond yields and mortgage rates.
In particular, longer-term yields should depend in part on market expectations about the future course of short-term rates.
For example, with the current setting of the funds rate held constant, any arriving news that leads bond market participants to expect higher future values of the funds rate will tend to raise bond yields and lower bond prices.
The link between long-term bond yields and market expectations of future monetary policy actions is familiar to all financial-market participants and has been well supported by recent empirical research.
For example, Antulio Bomfim has demonstrated that the shape of the term structure of Treasury yields can be effectively described by a two-factor model, in which the first factor corresponds to the current setting of the funds rate and the second factor closely approximates medium-term monetary policy expectations (Bomfim, 2003).
The fact that market expectations of future settings of the federal funds rate are at least as important as the current value of the funds rate in determining key interest rates such as bond and mortgage rates suggests a potentially important role for central bank communication: If effective communication can help financial markets develop more accurate expectations of the likely future course of the funds rate, policy will be more effective (in a precise sense that I will explain further soon), and risk in financial markets should be reduced as well.
It is worth emphasizing that the predictability of monetary policy actions has both short-run and long-run aspects.
A central bank may, through various means, improve the market's ability to anticipate its next policy move.
Improving short-term predictability is not unimportant, because it may reduce risk premiums in asset markets and influence shorter-term yields.
But signaling the likely action at the next meeting is not sufficient for effective policymaking.
Because the values of long-term assets are affected by the whole trajectory of expected short-term rates, it is even more vital that information relevant to estimating that trajectory be communicated.
As I will argue later, this can usually be done only by providing information about the central bank's objectives, assessment of the economy, and policy strategy.
Communication, Asymmetric Information, and Learning Ideally, what should central bank communication try to achieve?
In an important analysis of the issue of central bank transparency, my FOMC colleague William Poole laid out a benchmark case in which the potential benefits of communication would be fully realized (Poole, 2003).
In this benchmark case, the central bank has well-defined objectives and pursues regular and systematic policies consistent with those objectives.
More important for our purposes, in this idealized world, financial markets are highly efficient and well informed.
In particular, financial-market participants have access to all the information that the central bank uses in making policy decisions.
Let us call the premise that the central bank has no significant information advantage over the private sector the assumption of symmetric information.
If the conditions of systematic policymaking, financial-market efficiency, and symmetric information all held, then one might hope that the economy would converge to a rational expectations equilibrium, in which participants in financial markets would need only to analyze incoming, publicly available economic data to make efficient forecasts of future Federal Reserve actions.1 In this benchmark case, there would be no marginal benefit to central bank communication, beyond whatever was necessary to support this equilibrium in the first place.
Of course, to describe this idealized benchmark case is to recognize that it is at best an approximate description of the economy in which we live.
In practice, financial-market participants generally do not have as much information as monetary policymakers do about a number of key inputs to policymaking, including the policymakers' own objectives, their (possibly implicit) model of the economy and the monetary transmission mechanism, their assessment of the economic situation (including both forecasts and the risks to the forecast), and their policy strategy.
To the extent that this asymmetry of information between the central bank and the financial markets is quantitatively important--and I will present some evidence on this point shortly--financial markets will not price bonds and other assets efficiently (relative to the information possessed by the central bank), and scope may exist for central bank communication to improve the effectiveness of monetary policy and the overall performance of the economy.
A skeptic might argue that noise and other sources of pricing inefficiency pervade the financial markets, so that improving the predictability of monetary policy is of limited importance in practice, except perhaps to a few brokers and traders.
To the contrary, there is good reason to believe that information asymmetries between the central bank and financial markets may matter a great deal for economic welfare.
A theoretical basis for this view is provided by the lively recent literature on adaptive learning and monetary policy.
This work has shown that, when the public does not know but instead must estimate the central bank's reaction function and other economic relationships using observed data, we have no guarantee that the economy will converge--even in infinite time--to the optimal rational expectations equilibrium.2 In general, the problem is that the public's learning process itself affects the behavior of the economy--for example, as when expectational errors by bond traders affect interest rates and thus a wide range of economic decisions.
The feedback effect of learning on the economy, this literature has shown, can in principle lead to unstable or indeterminate outcomes.
More generally, the dynamic behavior of an economy with asymmetric information and learning may be radically different from the behavior of the same economy in the optimal rational expectations equilibrium.
