When my longtime friend Lance Jacobson extended this invitation more than a year ago, I readily accepted.
Several months later, the 2004 calendar of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meetings was released, and I discovered that this meeting would occur on the day following the Committee's May meeting.
Because FOMC members observe a blackout on discussions of the economy for the week before and the week of the FOMC meetings, I prefer not to talk about current economic conditions.
However, I can provide you with some insight into the way the FOMC functions and the impact of monetary policy on the U.S. and global economies.
My former Federal Reserve colleague Laurence Meyer provided the blueprint for this presentation in a 1998 speech entitled "Come with Me to the FOMC.
"1 That title, in turn, was borrowed from remarks given back in 1951.
While my remarks are not identical in either style or substance, I have borrowed heavily from Larry's presentation, and you have the assurance that they have a long history.
First, a comment or two on who we are.
Nineteen policymakers participate in FOMC meetings, although at most only twelve vote at any one time.
At times vacancies on the Board mean that the FOMC has fewer than twelve voting members.
The Board has now operated at full strength for almost two years, after several years with two vacancies.
Each of the Board members is appointed by the President of the United States and confirmed by the Senate.
Our Chairman, Alan Greenspan, has two designations: The President has appointed him both as a Board member and as Chairman.
A Board member's term is fourteen years, and the Chairman has a term of four years.
Though Alan Greenspan's chairmanship expires this June, his term as a Board member extends through January 2006.
As you may know, President Bush announced last year that he intended to reappoint Mr. Greenspan as Chairman.
The Board Vice Chairman is also appointed by the President for a four-year term.
The current Vice Chairman, Roger Ferguson, was reappointed last fall.
In addition to the Board of Governors, five of the twelve Reserve Bank presidents vote in any given year.
The President of the New York Fed is a permanent voting member whereas the other Bank presidents vote every other or every third year.
If you find this construct confusing, or unduly complex, perhaps a bit of background is in order.
The Federal Reserve System is generically described as the central bank of the United States.
In the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries there were two attempts to establish a central bank of the United States, and neither endured for more than twenty years--in contrast to most European nations, where central banks were well established by the nineteenth century.
Though you may not be familiar with the history of our central bank, you may well remember learning about the debates on the concept of federalism by our nation's founders, when the forces favoring decentralization, led by Thomas Jefferson, fought the proponents of a more centralized government, led by Alexander Hamilton.
The Jeffersonian forces largely prevailed.
As a result, the United States lacked a strong central bank presence but had no authority even to grant national charters to commercial banks until the Abraham Lincoln Administration.
All bank charters were originally granted by the states and, as a consequence, the United States at one time had more than 25,000 bank charters.
Today, we have about 8,000 separate bank charters.
By contrast, most other developed nations have fewer than 100 separately chartered banks.
In the early part of the last century, a monetary panic stimulated the legislation leading to the Federal Reserve Act of 1913.
And consistent with our tradition of dispersed economic power, the new central bank of the United States was created with a significant grass roots component.
As a result, twelve Federal Reserve Banks were created, owned by member banks in each District, headed by a Reserve Bank president, and supervised by the Federal Reserve Board in Washington.
To give you a sense of the dispersal of resources within the Federal Reserve, more than 22,000 employees work in the System, meaning both the Banks and the Board.
Of that number, about 1,700 work for the Board in Washington, and the remaining 20,000-plus work in the twelve Banks.
Of the 1,700 Washington employees, roughly 250 are Ph.D. economists, the majority of whom support the Board's monetary policy responsibilities.
The FOMC has eight scheduled meetings each year, roughly every six weeks.
Financial markets follow the FOMC's actions very carefully and examine each word in the statement released after each meeting.
Today I would like to share with you my perspectives gleaned from thirty months on the Board and twenty FOMC meetings.
I was most impressed at my first FOMC meeting in December 2001 by the extraordinary level of preparation by and for the FOMC members.
Let me begin by describing the contributions of the twelve Bank presidents.
Each of the twelve Banks is staffed with economists who monitor the economic conditions in their respective Districts.
A summary of the regional analysis is compiled in what we call the Beige Book (because it has a beige cover) and released to the public about two weeks before the FOMC meeting.
Today we are in Florida, which is part of the Atlanta Fed's District, so let me speculate on how developments in this area's economy may enter our deliberations.
Jack Guynn, president of the Atlanta Fed, comes to the meeting prepared to discuss the outlook for the entire Sixth Federal Reserve District.
With respect to this particular part of the District, Jack may discuss Florida's citrus crop, the relative health of the tourism industry, and trends in Florida real estate prices.
Because Florida is also a gateway to Latin America, he may also discuss factors affecting trade with that part of the world.
Similar preparations take place at each of the other eleven Banks.
Though only five presidents vote at each meeting, all twelve prepare reports and participate fully in FOMC discussions.
The president of the New York Federal Reserve Bank is accorded a special role on the FOMC.
That person--currently Timothy Geithner--is always a voting member and is traditionally elected as Vice Chairman of the FOMC.
This role is largely a reflection of the New York Fed's responsibility for implementing monetary policy decisions through its open market desk operations.
Typically, after the approval of the minutes of the previous FOMC meeting, the first order of business is a report from the System Open Market Account (SOMA) Manager at the New York Fed.
The Manager discusses market activity since the most recent FOMC meeting and may also report on any other domestic or international market activity that may reflect trends in the U.S. and world economies.
The SOMA Manager's report is followed by reports by senior Board economists, including the directors of the Division of Research and Statistics and the Division of International Finance.
Each report summarizes what we refer to as the Greenbook, which is prepared by a team of economists.
The time between receipt of the Greenbook and the reports by the directors is a time of intense study and preparation by the FOMC members.
Governors often schedule briefings from Fed economists besides conducting their own individual reviews.
The materials typically arrive on our desks late Thursday or early Friday and our Board review of economic conditions occurs the following Monday morning.
In our household, my family has learned that my time during the weekend before an FOMC meeting is often largely consumed in preparation for it.
While the preparation for FOMC members is very intense, I would be remiss if I did not give full credit to the effort of the economists preparing the reports.
Fed staff economists hold off their Greenbook preparation until the last possible minute and supplement it just before the meeting with the most up-to-date economic data releases and developments.
The Federal Reserve Board has, over time, developed powerful econometric modeling tools to assist our understanding of the many interrelated economic forces.
In large part because human behavior cannot be modeled, we cannot fully anticipate all the factors that can affect our economic policy, and no econometric model can predict perfectly.
Therefore we often review alternative scenarios that may reflect different ways in which the economy may respond in a variety of situations.
After the economists' reports, we turn to the presidents and governors.
Typically the presidents report first on regional economic developments as well as on their independent views on the national economy.
Not surprisingly, economists from the Banks and the Board largely agree, but occasionally discernable differences exist, particularly with respect to economic forecasts.
The presidents' reports often include anecdotal updates from businesses or other sources to provide real-time information on regional economic activity.
Following the presidents' presentations, the Fed governors provide their individual analyses.
Our presentations focus largely on analysis of the current condition of the economy and, for the most part, do not contain monetary policy recommendations.
