Main Menu Toggle Button Sections Search Toggle Button Search Search Submit Button Submit Aboutthe Fed Structure of the Federal Reserve System The Fed Explained Board Members Advisory Councils Federal Reserve Banks Federal Reserve Act Currency Board Meetings Board Votes Diversity & Inclusion Careers Do Business with the Board Holidays Observed - K.8 Ethics & Values Contact Requesting Information (FOIA) FAQs Economic Education Fed Financial Statements Innovation News & Events Press Releases Speeches Testimony Calendar Videos Photo Gallery Conferences MonetaryPolicy Federal Open Market Committee About the FOMC Meeting calendars and information Transcripts and other historical materials FAQs Monetary Policy Principles and Practice Notes Policy Implementation Policy Normalization Policy Tools Reports Monetary Policy Report Beige Book Federal Reserve Balance Sheet Developments Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications Overview Supervision& Regulation Institution Supervision Community & Regional Financial Institutions Large Financial Institutions Foreign Banking Organizations Financial Market Utilities Consumer Compliance Reports Federal Reserve Supervision and Regulation Report Reporting Forms All Reporting Forms Recent Updates Information collections under review Financial Statements Applications/structure change Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) Municipal & Government Securities Supervision & Regulation Letters By Year By Topic Banking Applications & Legal Developments Application Process Board & Reserve Bank Action Enforcement Actions & Legal Developments Regulatory Resources Regulations Manuals Basel Regulatory Framework Volcker Rule Education, Training, and Assistance Banking & Data Structure Beneficial Ownership reports Large Commercial Banks U.S. Offices of Foreign Entities Financial Holding Companies Interstate Branching Securities Underwriting & Dealing Subsidiaries Minority Depository Institutions FinancialStability Financial Stability Assessments About Financial Stability Types of Financial System Vulnerabilities & Risks Monitoring Risk Across the Financial System Proactive Monitoring of Markets & Institutions Financial Stability & Stress Testing Financial Stability Coordination & Actions Responding to Financial System Emergencies Cooperation on Financial Stability Reports Financial Stability Report PaymentSystems Regulations & Statutes Regulation CC (Availability of Funds and Collection of Checks) Regulation II (Debit Card Interchange Fees and Routing) Regulation HH (Financial Market Utilities) Other Regulations and Statutes Payment Policies Federal Reserve's Key Policies for the Provision of Financial Services Overnight Overdrafts Payment System Risk Sponsorship for Priority Telecommunication Services Reserve Bank Payment Services & Data Automated Clearinghouse Services Check Services Currency and Coin Services Daylight Overdrafts and Fees FedNowâ„ Service Fedwire Funds Services Fedwire Securities Services Fiscal Agency Services National Settlement Service Financial Market Utilities & Infrastructures Supervision & Oversight of Financial Market Infrastructures Designated Financial Market Utilities International Standards for Financial Market Infrastructures Research, Committees, and Forums Payment Research Federal Reserve Payments Study (FRPS) Payments System Policy Advisory Committee Forums EconomicResearch Meet the Economists Working Papers and Notes Finance and Economics Discussion Series (FEDS) FEDS Notes International Finance Discussion Papers (IFDP) Data, Models and Tools Economic Research Data FRB/US Model Estimated Dynamic Optimization (EDO) Model Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) Data Data Download Program Bank Assets and Liabilities Aggregate Reserves of Depository Institutions and the Monetary Base - H.3 Assets and Liabilities of Commercial Banks in the U.S. - H.8 Assets and Liabilities of U.S.
Branches and Agencies of Foreign Banks Charge-Off and Delinquency Rates on Loans and Leases at Commercial Banks Senior Financial Officer Survey Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices Bank Structure Data Large Commercial Banks Minority Depository Institutions Structure and Share Data for the U.S. Offices of Foreign Banks Business Finance Commercial Paper Finance Companies - G.20 New Security Issues, State and Local Governments New Security Issues, U.S.
Corporations Dealer Financing Terms Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms Exchange Rates and International Data Foreign Exchange Rates - H.10/G.5 International Summary Statistics Securities Holdings and Transactions Statistics Reported by Banks and Other Financial Firms in the United States Structure and Share Data for U.S. Offices of Foreign Banks Financial Accounts Financial Accounts of the United States - Z.1 Household Finance Consumer Credit - G.19 Household Debt Service and Financial Obligations Ratios Mortgage Debt Outstanding Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking Industrial Activity Industrial Production and Capacity Utilization - G.17 Interest Rates Selected Interest Rates - H.15 Micro Data Reference Manual (MDRM) Micro and Macro Data Collections Money Stock and Reserve Balances Factors Affecting Reserve Balances - H.4.1 Money Stock Measures - H.6 Other Yield Curve Models and Data Consumers& Communities Regulations Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) All Regulations SupervisionÂ & Enforcement CA Letters Enforcement Actions Independent Foreclosure Review Community Development Housing and Neighborhood Revitalization Small Business and Entrepreneurship Employment and Workforce Development Community Development Finance Rural Community and Economic Development Conferences ResearchÂ & Analysis Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking Research Publications & Data Analysis Community Advisory Council Consumer Resources Mortgage and Foreclosure Resources Federal Reserve Community Development Resources Home News & Events Speeches Speech PDF Please enable JavaScript if it is disabled in your browser or access the information through the links provided below.
October 01, 2020 Mortgage Market Regulation and Access to Mortgage Credit Governor Michelle W. Bowman At "Opportunities and Challenges for Homeownership," a Virtual Roundtable Discussion, Jake Jabs College of Business and Entrepreneurship, Montana State University, Bozeman, Montana (via webcast) Share Watch Live Good afternoon, everyone.
Thank you to Montana State University (MSU) for hosting today's event and for that very kind introduction.
It is wonderful to see the success of your Community Banking Program here at MSU and your commitment to investing in the education of future generations of community bankers.
Throughout the response to the pandemic, community bankers have continued to serve as the primary source of credit to small businesses and have continued to provide economic and financial support to communities across our nation.
Young people, like all of you engaged in this program, will very likely become the future leaders of these institutions, which are critical to their communities and to our economy and financial system.
One of the most significant challenges facing community bankers today is navigating the complex regulatory framework.
One area that has become more complicated is a line of business that has traditionally been the foundation for community banking, home mortgage lending.
Community bank leaders consistently tell me that significant regulatory burden related to making home mortgages has been a major reason they have scaled back their mortgage lending activities or exited the market altogether.
Along with tightened lending standards, this trend has made it harder for middle- and lower-income borrowers to obtain mortgage credit since the global financial crisis.
Fortunately, work is under way to relieve that burden, and I will highlight one effort in particular.
But before I do, let me provide some context by reviewing the current state of the economy and its effect on homeowners and would-be homeowners.
The COVID-19 Pandemic and Homeownership in the U.S.
The COVID-19 pandemic is having a profound effect on individuals and families across the U.S. and throughout the world.
While a strong recovery has begun, it is clear that there is still a way to go before we are back to the robust economy we experienced at the beginning of the year.
These challenges are affecting homeowners and the lenders that provide credit to support them.
Many homeowners who have lost a job or have had their income affected by economic conditions have been able to work with their lenders, but such help may not be a long-term solution for many borrowers.
Fortunately, the housing market as a whole is a bright spot for the economy.
Higher home prices are improving the balance sheets of many households, even those that may face income and employment challenges, and new construction activity is generating new job opportunities.
While affordability remains an important consideration, it is encouraging that housing has performed well in response to low interest rates.
Mortgage Regulations and Access to Mortgage Credit However, even during this period of strong performance in the housing market, access to affordable mortgage credit remains a barrier to homeownership for some borrowers, due in part to regulatory burden.
Since the last financial crisis more than a decade ago, there have been a number of new mortgage regulations that added requirements for both borrowers and lenders.
While many of these requirements have contributed to a safer and more consumer-friendly mortgage market, they have also introduced significant paperwork and delays that can present roadblocks for many borrowers.
These new rules have also made it more difficult and costly for small banks to originate mortgage loans, leading many community banks to scale back on home lending activity or abandon it altogether.
Homeownership is as important to communities as it is to individuals, and access to credit for rural and low-to-moderate income communities often depends on community banks.
In many communities, especially rural communities, if the local bank has been forced out of mortgage lending due to burdensome regulation, it means little or no access to mortgage credit, preventing buyers from financing home purchases and homeowners from selling their homes.
Many leaders of small community banks have told me that the compliance costs for originating smaller mortgages are prohibitive, and that the staffing and training required to meet the strict requirements are extraordinary in relation to the limited number of mortgages they originate.
As one state banking commissioner said to me recently, "It doesn't make a lot of sense that you can make an $80,000 truck loan on two sides of a sheet of paper, but that many, many pages of paperwork are required to make a $40,000 loan on a mobile home or trailer."
In fact, I have been told by community bankers that they are sometimes compelled to make loans for lower-priced home purchases that are backed by other collateral, such as a car or equipment, because of the excessive burden of complying with the many residential home mortgage regulations and time frames for such small transactions.
As a result, these consumers may not have the benefit of the important consumer protections that having a home mortgage loan provides.
Reducing mortgage compliance burden would allow community banks to better meet the critical need for home lending in their communities.
Because of their local knowledge and strong customer relationships, community banks are often more willing to work with borrowers to get through difficult times.
Taking steps to simplify and lower this regulatory burden for small community banks and their customers would help to ensure that homeowners can stay in their homes during times of stress, like the one we are facing currently due to COVID-19.
One Area to Consider in Easing Burden The TILA-RESPA Integrated Disclosure, or TRID, is one of the real estate regulatory requirements that smaller banks cite most frequently as creating a heavy burden.
Commissioner Melanie Hall and the Montana Independent Bankers have been particularly helpful in highlighting the importance of this issue.
