I am pleased to participate in the excellent annual Philadelphia Federal Reserve Policy Forum to discuss this year’s timely topic of innovations in financial markets.
Innovations in financial markets have created a wide range of investment opportunities that allow capital to be allocated to its most productive uses and risks to be dispersed across a wide range of market participants.
Yet, as we are now seeing, innovation can also create challenges if market participants face difficulties in valuing a new instrument because they realize that they do not have the information they need or if they are uncertain about the information they do have.
In such situations, price discovery and liquidity in the market for those innovative products can become impaired.
In my remarks today, I would like to explore the role of information in the development of new financial products and then draw some lessons about risk management and regulation.
In particular, I will examine the role that investment in information gathering, processing, and evaluating plays in supporting the price discovery process and how such investment can lead toward a tendency to greater standardization as markets for innovative financial products mature.
Examples from both history and current experience will help to illustrate this tendency with respect to loan work-outs and restructurings.
I will then conclude by considering how a regulatory approach that encourages transparency and sound risk management, such as Basel II, can be valuable in fostering a robust environment for the introduction of innovative financial products.
Experimentation and Learning in New Instrument Development Typically, when a new product is being developed, there is an initial experimentation phase in which market participants learn a great deal about the product’s performance and risk characteristics.
This phase involves gathering and processing information and modeling the performance of the product in various scenarios and under different market conditions.
It may then take time for market participants to understand what, exactly, they need to know to value a product.
During the early phases, a fair amount of due diligence is appropriate, given the greater uncertainty associated with innovative products.
The investment in gathering, processing, and evaluating information then, as I will discuss, often leads to greater standardization of products and contract terms, which can enhance liquidity of products as their markets mature.
In the initial experimentation phase, the terms and characteristics of a new product are adjusted in response to market acceptance--or lack thereof.
