Sovereigns were purportedly ready to put historic conflicts in abeyance as cultures and ideologies coalesced around the principles of liberalism, freedom, and democracy.
Detractors have argued that this end-of-history thesis is a "mirage" (Kagan, 2007).
Intervening geopolitical events appear to have upended the notion that History is all but written, that ideological conflicts will inexorably abate.
At the very least, the experience of the past dozen years suggests that the hopes and aspirations for a less confrontational political and ideological era may be delayed.
But even as the geopolitical situation has become more complex, and as conflicts among ideologies become more obvious, I wonder whether we are seeing--in certain other spheres of social interaction--some coalescing of views, some mutual understanding of what makes for a strong and enduring system.
Here, befitting an audience of business leaders and economists, I am thinking of economic policy and, in particular, monetary policy in market-based economies.2 As recently as several months ago, some may have been tempted to believe that, in the realm of economic policy, we were on the precipice of the end of history.
The seemingly benign financial and economic conditions of the past few years may have appeared to be approaching this nirvana.3 If the end of economic history were at hand, what would it look like?
You would almost assuredly find strong, synchronized global economic growth; favorable inflation readings and anchored inflation expectations; low global risk premiums and low term premiums; muted volatility across asset markets; a relatively free flow of products and services across national boundaries; interconnected financial markets; deep, robust, and highly liquid secondary trading; the democratization of credit and growing access to capital; and, finally, a stance of monetary policy approximating its natural equilibrium.
Think of the economic environment of several months ago, prior to the more recent financial turmoil.
The appearance of these sorts of benign indicators could have provided useful testimony in support of the end-of-history thesis in the economic realm.
But then what is to be made of the global liquidity shock that crested in August and continues to manifest itself to this day?
In my view, recent financial turmoil should not be considered an accident of history.
Rather, it is History's latest reminder to policymakers and market participants alike that we ought to be humble in our convictions and cautious in our deeds as we seek a better understanding of what makes a strong and stable economic and financial system.
The lessons learned from natural experiments in economics during recent decades offer great promise that macroeconomic performance can be improved.
But as empiricists outside of our "dismal science" would remind us, there are few control groups in economics.
As a result, the definitive account has not been written.
Nor has the practical conduct of policy yet evolved to the point at which financial crises and economic downturns can be wholly avoided.
As a result, I will argue, the end of history may have to wait awhile.
Let me first discuss the evolution of financial markets.
Next, I will highlight the evolution of monetary policy and financial stability.
Finally, I will turn to more recent financial and monetary events.
Evolution of Financial MarketsDuring the past several years, the cause of economic freedom and the culture of capitalism have appeared firmly on the march.
Founding ideologies aside, countries' economies are more connected by virtue of increased trade of products and services.
Free markets, technological innovation, and instant communications are the watchwords of the global economy.
And the dissemination of financial innovation has gained new converts.
London, Hong Kong, Singapore, and Shanghai increasingly seek to challenge New York as the center of global financial markets.
Competitive national ambitions, perhaps, have demanded an embrace of economic liberalism to build wealth even among those regimes that may prefer something closer to autocracy in their non-economic dealings.
Democratizing credit to enlarge the global middle class, efficiently allocating capital, and dispersing risk exposures--these remain compelling practices for private market participants throughout the world.
These financial market tailwinds bolstered worldwide economic growth, which is near record levels.
In 2006, the U.S. economy grew 3 percent, while growth outside the United States averaged nearly 4 percent as all major regions racked up solid gains.
So far this year (through the third quarter in the United States and through the second quarter elsewhere), U.S. output growth managed to continue apace, while growth for the rest of the world picked up to more than 4 percent.
Clearly the global economy has been firing on all cylinders, with emerging Asia taking the lead.
There can be little doubt that this macroeconomic performance is due, at least in part, to the increased adoption of liberal economic practices around the globe.
Perhaps, then, the case for the end of economic history is not without some evidentiary backing and persuasive appeal.
Evolution of Monetary Policy and Financial Stability In a recent survey paper, David Laidler identifies three tenets that embody the current consensus on the conduct of monetary policy in advanced economies (Laidler, 2007).
First, market economies are inherently self-righting; second, open economies perform best under flexible exchange rates; and third, central bankers should focus on price stability as their long-run objective.4 Monetary policy in the past couple of decades can, almost assuredly, claim far more successes than failures.
Look no further than measures of consumer price inflation in the advanced economies.
Median inflation (as defined by the International Monetary Fund) has held near 2 percent for the decade.
This performance has helped anchor inflation expectations, which, in turn, has helped damp the pass-through of supply-related price shocks.
The low inflation rate has also permitted central banks to respond more forcefully to output fluctuations and more opportunistically to ensure low and stable prices.
The improved inflation performance has come not at the expense of, but in conjunction with, output stability.
Researchers have documented the so-called Great Moderation, in which the U.S. economy has achieved a marked reduction in the volatility of both real gross domestic product and core inflation over the past twenty years or so.
Most economists would probably attribute at least some portion of the Great Moderation in the growth of real output to monetary policy.
Despite the record of steadier economic performance, bouts of financial market instability continue to arise.
Indeed, in my judgment, the inexorable march of technological change and creative destruction in a market economy all but assures the occurrence of such episodes (Schumpeter, 1942).
To be sure, it is the recurrence of such episodes that supplies kindling to the debate on the appropriate balance between flexible, competitive financial markets and regulations that could limit the exuberance of market responses, irrational or otherwise.
In the episode at hand, early-cycle increases in housing prices, escalating returns of leveraged buyouts, and lower all-in financing costs made possible by structured-finance products highlighted new profit-making opportunities for providers and users of capital.
As economic historians remind us, more entities are thus drawn into the activity until competition pushes its boundaries beyond the point of positive returns (Kindleberger, 1996).
