This is the first time I have been at the Union League in nearly four decades, but I am gratified to learn that your organization remains as vital and active as it was in the 1950s when I visited friends here with some frequency.
Today I would like to address an issue that almost certainly will be at the forefront of American concerns over the next decade: our largest federal entitlement program, social security.
It is becoming conventional wisdom that the social security system, as currently constructed, will not be fully viable after the so-called baby boom generation starts to retire in about fifteen years.
The most recent report by the social security trustees projected that the trust funds of the system will grow over approximately the next fifteen years.
However, beginning in the year 2012, the annual expected costs of social security are projected to exceed annual earmarked tax receipts, and the consequent deficits are projected to deplete the trust funds by the year 2029.
While such evaluations are based on an uncertain future, the benefit per current retiree under existing law, adjusted for inflation, can be forecast with some precision over the next thirty years.
Somewhat less precision is possible for future retirees.
The price escalation of benefits, of course, is even more difficult to pin down.
But since price inflation has an equal effect on wages subject to social security taxation, for all practical purposes, the degree of inflation does not have a large direct effect on the net funding of the system over the long run.
However, the rate of inflation, because it affects the overall economy, presumably does affect the real wage base from which social security taxes and future benefits are derived.
The projection of inflation-adjusted taxes, which are subject to a wider degree of uncertainty than total benefits, is largely driven by real wage growth--that is, wage growth adjusted for inflation--which, in turn, is primarily determined by the growth of productivity.
Projecting productivity in line with the pattern of the last quarter century suggests a trend of revenue falling far short of the levels required to finance the benefits of the large baby-boomer bulge in retirees anticipated to start at about 2010.
I should state, parenthetically, that if recent productivity trends are underestimated, as I suspect they are, for much the same reasons are the projected trends of both real benefits and payroll taxes.
The real future funding shortfall, therefore, would not be materially affected.
Our social security problem is, thus, not merely statistical; it is the consequence of a projected shortfall in real resources dedicated to social security.
In money terms, the current social security trust fund of a half trillion dollars falls far short of the levels required to fund the current obligations to pay promised benefits to those already retired and those who will retire in the years ahead.
Social security, unlike fully funded private retirement programs, is largely an intergenerational transfer.
Today's workers are essentially paying for today's retirees.
Under the current system, the social security benefits paid to today's workers when they retire in the future will be primarily dependent upon the payroll taxes acquired from future workers.
Accordingly, if the social security system is to survive in its current form, either real benefits must be curtailed, or real taxes increased.
The latter can come from either higher tax rates or higher real wage growth--in effect, higher productivity growth.
However, as I will be explaining shortly, higher productivity is unlikely alone to do the trick.
Moreover, increased social security tax rates, of course, are controversial in that many perceive them, myself included, to adversely affect employment.
A primary cause of social security's funding imbalance stems from the fact that, until very recently, the payments into the social security trust accounts by the average employee, plus employer contributions and interest earned, were inadequate, at retirement, to fund the total of retirement benefits.
This has started to change.
Under the most recent revisions to the law, and presumably conservative economic and demographic assumptions, today's younger workers will be paying social security taxes over their working years that appear sufficient to fund their benefits during retirement.
