Many of them said, enthusiastically, "Congratulations!"
Then they asked with a bit of embarrassment, "Is it a full-time job?"
or "What will you find to do between meetings?"
The meetings they were aware of, of course, were those of the Federal Open Market Committee.
They knew that the FOMC meets every six weeks or so to "set interest rates."
That sounds like real power, so the FOMC gets a lot of press attention even when, as happened again this week, we meet and decide to do absolutely nothing at all.
The group gathered here today, however, realizes that monetary policy, while important, is not actually very time-consuming.
If you cared enough to come to this conference, you also have a strong conviction that the health and vigor of the American economy depends not only on good macro-economic policy, although that certainly helps, but also on the safety, soundness and efficiency of the banking system.
We need a banking system that works well and one in which citizens and businesses, foreign and domestic, have high and well placed confidence.
So I want to talk today, as seems appropriate on the fifth anniversary of FDICIA, about the subject that occupies much of our attention at the Federal Reserve: the prudential regulation of banks and how to improve it.
Indeed, I want to focus today, not so much on what Congress needs to do to ensure the safety and soundness of the bank system in this rapidly changing world--there are others on the program to take on that task--but more narrowly on how bank regulators should go about their jobs of supervising bank risk-taking.
The evolving search for policies that would guarantee a safe, sound and efficient banking system has featured learning from experience.
In the 1930s, Americans learned, expensively, about the hazards of not having a safety net in a crisis that almost wiped out the banking system.
In the 1980s, they learned a lot about the hazards of having a safety net, especially about the moral hazard associated with deposit insurance.
