I understand that one of the objectives of this lecture series is to foster discussion of accounting and auditing issues facing the accounting profession and to promote communication and coordination among professional accounting organizations.
I applaud your efforts.
U.S. accounting and auditing standards are central to the integrity of our financial system.
They are also important to the Federal Reserve's efforts to supervise and regulate banking organizations, as well as efforts to enhance and harmonize such standards internationally.
For these reasons, I welcome the opportunity to talk with you this evening about U.S. bank accounting issues and international harmonization from a bank supervisory perspective.
The Heightened Importance of Accounting and Auditing Standards By way of background, four developments have heightened the importance of accounting and auditing standards in the bank supervisory framework.
First, there has been a marked increase in the issuance of accounting and auditing standards that have had a major impact on the banking industry.
This trend seemed to start with the accounting standard for foreign currency translation in 1981.
Since then, and particularly in this decade, new Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) standards and proposals affecting banks have been issued at a blistering pace in such areas as loan-loss accounting, asset securitization, mortgage servicing, securities activities, and derivatives.
Bankers and examiners have felt the impact of these accounting developments and have seen business strategies and transaction types change as a result.
Indeed, many feel that the increased complexity of certain types of financial transactions has been driven, in part, by changes in accounting and disclosure requirements.
Second, new statutes have prompted more attention to accounting and auditing practices.
For example, section 112 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991 (FDICIA) sets forth new rules for audit committees and certain auditor and management reports by the larger banks.
Section 121 of FDICIA requires that bank regulatory reporting requirements be consistent with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) or more stringent than GAAP.
Third, changes in accounting treatments can often dramatically affect reported results.
For example, when implemented in 1994, FASB Interpretation No.
39 on netting of assets and liabilities -- called "FIN 39" -- increased the total assets of some of the largest banks by billions of dollars each and by around $100 billion for the banking industry as a whole.
Later in 1994, another FASB interpretation on netting of repurchase transactions -- FIN 41 -- caused billion dollar decreases in assets at some of the money center banks.
Thus, sometimes even obscure accounting standards can have a significant effect on the "bottom line" of financial institutions.
The fourth development that has increased the importance of accounting and auditing standards perhaps the most to bank supervisors is their crucial role in risk-focused supervision of financial institutions.
During recent years, the Federal Reserve has endeavored to streamline the examination process to make it more focused on risks and to make greater use of technological innovations.
This approach recognizes that while financial and technological innovations do not change the substance of the fundamental risks of banking, these risks may be repackaged in more complex forms that are difficult to measure and manage.
Increasingly, since 1991, our examination guidance has stressed the need for banking organizations to implement sound risk management practices that provide for Active oversight by management and the board of directors Clearly defined policies, procedures, and authority Comprehensive risk measurement and reporting systems Adequate audits and systems of internal controls.
In this regard, the Federal Reserve recognizes that accounting, auditing, and disclosure play a crucial role in the financial marketplace.
Accounting standards provide the foundation for credible financial statements and other disclosures that are key means for communicating a firm's operating results and its overall health, as well as for making more transparent various operating activities.
Disclosure of reliable information facilitates market discipline, strengthens confidence, and reduces the chance that rumors and misleading information could cause market instability.
Such results have obvious implications for supervisors' abilities to oversee the safety and soundness of depository institutions and for the Federal Reserve in its responsibilities for financial market stability.
These standards are also important to the federal banking agencies because of their critical role in regulatory financial reports -- such as the bank Call Report and bank holding company Y-Reports.
The supervisory agencies monitor these reports to follow financial developments at depository institutions.
When reported financial information indicates a deterioration in financial condition, these monitoring systems signal the need for on-site examinations, targeted reviews, and other appropriate actions.
Because these reports are largely based on GAAP, accounting standards have an important impact on the information that is available for examination and other supervisory purposes.
The better the quality of financial information -- and of the accounting standards that shape this information -- the greater our ability to monitor and supervise banks effectively.
Moreover, because our quarterly regulatory financial reports are generally available to the public, they serve an important public disclosure purpose as well.
By facilitating market discipline, public disclosure helps reinforce supervisory efforts to encourage banks to maintain sound risk management practices and internal controls.
In this regard, auditor attestations help ensure that market discipline is based on quality information.
Adequate audits and internal controls are critical to risk management.
The risks inherent in bank operations are difficult to quantify and can pose a threat to the bank's safety and soundness.
Controls assuring the quality and integrity of business processes are important, and breakdowns can be devastating.
Indeed, a breakdown in internal controls or risk management systems was a root cause of several recent financial problems of large institutions.
At Barings Bank, it was not market risk, credit risk, or inadequate risk measurement -- but poor internal controls surrounding a single trader that closed the bank.
Similar internal control weaknesses were apparent at Daiwa, Sumitomo, and Kidder Peabody.
