This topic is being intensively addressed in the retail banking area, as stored value cards and Internet-based payment systems are introduced to the public, both in the United States and around the world.
This morning, however, I want to focus my remarks on the wholesale and correspondent banking markets, where electronic payments already are the norm, but where significant challenges still exist in trying to manage and reduce risks in the payment system.
Predicting the future would be folly.
However, the enormous amount of creative effort now being invested in addressing settlement risk issues is a very promising sign.
I believe it is a time for all of us to push forward aggressively in the wholesale banking area with the arduous work of making changes in the institutional arrangements for clearing and settlement.
Let me get right into that theme with a very specific announcement about Fedwire operations.
I am pleased to announce that yesterday the Federal Reserve Board approved the date on which the Fedwire funds transfer system will regularly open for business at 12:30 a.m. Eastern Time.
That date is Monday, December 8, 1997.
Let me repeat.
The date is Monday, December 8, 1997.
I would like to remind you of several key parts of the early Fedwire program.
Most importantly, participation will be voluntary.
There is no Federal Reserve requirement that depository institutions must be open to process Fedwires at 12:30 a.m.
Participation in the early morning will be determined by the needs of the marketplace.
In addition, Federal Reserve daylight overdraft credit will be available during the early morning period, 12:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m., on the same terms as during the normal operating day.
The Board's full daylight overdraft program, including overdraft caps and fees, will be applied in the usual manner.
I should note that although daylight overdraft fees will not change, they will be quoted on a basis that reflects the longer Fedwire operating day, beginning in December 1997.
