I was going to tell you the exact pattern of future interest rates over the next 12 months, but I decided that you probably wouldn't be interested.
In any event, as most of you know, monetary policy is only one of the responsibilities of the Federal Reserve.
Payments system issues and the regulation and supervision of banking companies are other major responsibilities.
It is a surprise to many, but supervision especially seems to occupy a large portion of our, and particularly my, attention.
Therefore, I've decided to talk today about a subject that should be near and dear to any group of financial analysts--namely, how safe is our banking system?
Put another way, what is the chance that we will suffer, any time soon, the kind of banking crisis that we experienced during the late 1980s, when about 1000 banks failed in just a five year period?
The short answer is "virtually zero," but how I arrived at that conclusion will take up the rest of my allotted time.
In some ways, my job as a bank supervisor is not too dissimilar from your job as a market analyst.
We both spend our time assessing risk versus return.
Rating agencies opine on whether the subordinated debt of a financial institution should be rated single-A or double-A, or whether its stock should be rated a buy, hold, or sell.
You step in the shoes of your client to determine whether the return on a stock or bond is worth the risk.
Bank examiners also assess risk, and we concentrate on the quality and quantity of capital supporting a bank's ventures.
Banks, in doing their job, do take on risk, extend credit, and grease the wheels of the economy.
We want banks to take on risk, we want them to be profitable.
But too much risk-taking is unacceptable from a systemic point of view.
The important questions are: can we accurately assess the risks that our banks are taking, and how much risk is too much?
The Revolution in Bank Risk-Taking If you've been doing your homework, you know that banks in the 1990s, especially the very largest banks, are very different animals from those of 10 or 20 years ago.
No longer do banks simply take in deposits and lend money to businesses and households.
Much of the banking activity of today, and much of banking risk, does not involve the balance sheet at all.
For example, when a Fortune 500 company issues commercial paper to borrow directly from the marketplace rather than from its banker, the banker still may get a piece of the action in the form of a credit enhancement issued to the commercial paper facility.
Or, when a company issues a bond, it may be the investment banking subsidiary of a bank holding company that underwrites the issue.
When a computer software company hedges a foreign sale of its product by entering into a foreign exchange forward contract, the derivative counterparty may be a commercial bank.
Banking is indeed undergoing rapid change, but the basic business of banking remains essentially the same.
That business is to work with, and profit from, financial risk.
Just as they did 20 years ago, banks measure risk, price risk, assume risk, and manage risk--risk of all kinds including credit risk, market risk, and ordinary business risk.
But the risk manifests itself in different ways and in very different financial products than twenty years ago.
We can point to at least three major arenas in which this banking revolution is being carried out.
Derivatives First, the advent of financial derivatives--including interest rate, foreign exchange, and credit derivatives--permits banks, as well as their nonbank competitors, to "slice and dice" the risks associated with the underlying asset in a dazzling variety of ways.
