Financial modernization today refers to legislative and regulatory reform to remove limitations on permissible activities for banking, securities, and other financial services firms.
Financial modernization in the United States is sometimes used to refer specifically to the repeal of the Glass-Steagall Act which limits banks' involvement in security underwriting and dealing.
I will use a broader interpretation that includes, in addition, the revision of the Bank Holding Company Act to allow banks to engage in insurance and other financial activities, the establishment of a two-way street that allows banks to affiliate with securities and insurance firms and insurance and security firms to affiliate with banks, a rationalization of the regulatory framework for banks and other financial services firms appropriate to the expanded powers and structural reforms, and at least a careful consideration of a common charter for commercial banks and thrift institutions and the mixing of banking and commerce.
The financial services industry is moving in the direction of expanded activities and increased competition, with or without Congressional action, driven by market realities, financial innovations, technological change and global competition.
Federal banking regulators are cooperating in this process, often reluctantly, but recognizing already existing erosions to regulations.
Their ability to do so is often limited by statutory constraints, however, and, as a result, a clean and full rationalization of the structure of the financial services industry cannot be achieved without Congressional action.
Nevertheless, what lies ahead is less a revolution than the completion of an ongoing process of financial market evolution.
There are important disagreements about the breadth of expanded activities appropriate in banking organizations, the costs and benefits of structural restrictions to protect banks from added risks, and the appropriate regulatory framework for the reformed financial services industry.
Nonetheless, I believe that policy makers have come to the conclusion that, while their hand may be forced by events, there are significant benefits from expanding the permissible activities of banks and other financial services firms.
These benefits include increased competition in the financial services industry, and increased efficiency and consumer convenience in the provision of financial services.
Allowing securities firms to compete directly with banks and banks with securities firms and each to compete with insurance firms will clearly enhance competition in the financial services industry.
Economic theory and historical experience suggest that competition lowers costs, increases pressure for innovation, and increases attentiveness to the needs and convenience of customers.
Financial modernization would allow financial services firms to serve better the needs and convenience of their customers both by lowering the costs of financial services and by facilitating one-stop shopping.
The Edge Act already permits U.S. banks to compete on more equal terms outside the U.S. by permitting the Federal Reserve to authorize U.S. banks to do abroad certain activities, e.g., securities underwriting and dealing, not authorized directly to U.S. banks in the U.S.
Moreover, U.S. banks are consistently evaluated by foreigners as the most innovative in the world.
Nonetheless, easing of regulations would enhance marginally the international competitiveness of U.S. banks.
Financial modernization also promotes efficiency in the production of financial services by allowing increased diversification of income sources by financial services firms and by allowing such firms to take advantage of economies of scope, that is, efficiencies that arise from producing related products.
