The official period of recession, as dated by the National Bureau of Economic Research, lasted only eight months, from March to November of 2001.
Real gross domestic product declined very modestly before resuming a moderate pace of growth, and some important sectors of the economy--residential construction being the leading example--remained exceptionally strong throughout the period.
Nevertheless, in one key aspect, namely, the performance of the labor market, the downturn was severe and the recovery has been exceptionally slow.
You may recall that the labor market also recovered slowly following the 1990-91 recession, earning that period the sobriquet "the jobless recovery."
However, since the trough of the current cycle in November 2001, the jobs situation by most measures has been even slower to improve than in the 1990-91 episode.
The weak labor market has imposed hardship on millions of American workers, their families, and their communities; and, conceivably, continued failure of the labor market to improve could threaten the sustainability of the economic recovery itself.
Thus, trying to understand what underlies the unusually delayed recovery of employment is critical.
In my talk today I will discuss some explanations for, and implications of, the current jobless recovery.
I will begin by discussing the measurement of employment, which has been the source of recent controversy.
I will then turn to explanations for the weakness of the labor market, noting that several factors have contributed to the problem.
Finally I will turn to the outlook for employment and the implications for monetary policy.
As always, the opinions I will express today are my own and do not necessarily reflect the views of my colleagues at the Board of Governors or on the Federal Open Market Committee.1 The Payroll Survey and the Household Survey As noted by Conan Doyle's great fictional detective, Sherlock Holmes, it is a "capital mistake" to theorize in advance of the data.
Before turning to economic explanations of the labor market's behavior, therefore, I will briefly discuss the problem of measuring job creation.
There are two leading sources of data on aggregate U.S. employment, known informally as the payroll survey and the household survey--and more formally, as the Current Employment Statistics survey and the Current Population Survey, respectively.
The payroll survey is the responsibility of the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), while the household survey is conducted jointly by the BLS and the Bureau of the Census.
The payroll survey is a survey of employers.
The monthly data gathered in this survey come from the payroll records of about 400,000 business establishments, covering among them about a third of total nonfarm payroll employment (including civilian government workers).
Also, with a lag of about a year, the payroll survey is benchmarked to an almost-complete count of U.S. payroll employment, based on unemployment insurance tax records and other administrative data.
The household survey, in contrast, is a survey of individuals; it is based on a random sample of about 60,000 households contacted each month by Census survey-takers.
For each household in the sample, the survey-takers attempt to determine how many people aged sixteen or older are currently employed, how many are looking but unable to find work (the unemployed), and how many are out of the labor force, meaning that they are neither employed nor actively looking for work.
The ratio of the unemployed to those working or looking for work is the well-known statistic, the civilian unemployment rate, which currently stands at just above 6 percent of the labor force.
An important and puzzling fact is that, although neither survey suggests that the U.S. job market is currently strong, the two surveys provide quite different estimates of the extent of job loss in the past three years.
According to the payroll survey (including the BLS's estimate of the upcoming benchmark revision), as of the end of September 2003 nonfarm payroll employment has fallen by some 2.8 million jobs since the beginning of the recession in March 2001 and by almost 1.2 million jobs since the recession's trough in November 2001.
Also, according to this survey, manufacturing is by far the hardest hit sector.
About 2.4 million of the 2.8 million jobs lost since March 2001 were in manufacturing, and manufacturing more than accounts for the net job loss since the recession trough.
Indeed, from the trough through this September, nonmanufacturing payrolls have actually grown by some 125,000 jobs.2 The household survey shows a less severe decline in employment than the payroll survey does.
To compare the data from the household and payroll surveys, we must first take account of the fact that their coverage is different.
Notably, the payroll survey counts the number of jobs, whereas the household survey counts the number of people employed.
Hence a person who holds two jobs would be counted twice in the payroll survey but only once in the household survey.
The household survey also counts certain groups of workers excluded from the payroll survey, including unincorporated self-employed workers, unpaid family workers, and farm workers.
One can correct for these differences and use the household survey to estimate nonfarm payroll employment, the concept measured by the payroll survey.
When the necessary adjustments are made, the net reduction in payroll employment since March 2001, according to the household survey, is just over 600,000 jobs, significantly less than the 2.8 million job-loss estimate of the payroll survey.
Also in contrast to the payroll survey, the household survey suggests that employment has recovered somewhat since the recession trough.
According to the household survey, although some 1.3 million payroll jobs were lost between March 2001 and November 2001, more than 600,000 jobs have been created since the recession officially ended in November 2001.
Which, if either, of these two surveys are we to believe?
The payroll survey has the important advantage of being based on a much larger sample; indeed, as already mentioned, with a lag of one year the payroll survey is adjusted to reflect virtually a complete count of nonfarm payroll employment.
Moreover, one would generally presume that firms' payroll records are likely to be more accurate than the information obtained by interviewing household members, as individuals may misunderstand the survey-taker's questions or for one reason or another misreport their own labor market status or that of other members of the household.
On the other hand, the household survey has potential advantages of its own: For example, it may capture "off-the-books" employment, which will generally be missed by the payroll survey.
Some analysts have also suggested that the household survey may be more effective than the payroll survey at capturing jobs created by new businesses, particularly small businesses, during the early expansion phase of the cycle.
On this latter point, however, a recent redesign of the payroll survey, which among other improvements allows new samples of employers to be drawn more frequently, has likely improved the survey's coverage of startup businesses.
Indeed, the latest two benchmark revisions, in March 2002 and March 2003, both revised payroll employment downward; if the main problem with the survey had been a failure to measure employment by new businesses, the revisions would have been upward.
A team of BLS and Census statisticians (Nardone and others, 2003) recently conducted a careful comparative study of the two surveys.
Although the study does not come to firm conclusions, it does suggest one possibly important reason to believe that the household survey is currently overstating employment growth.
Because the household survey is only a sampling of the population, much like a public opinion poll, aggregate employment figures can be obtained from this survey only by scaling up the household responses by factors that reflect the estimated size and composition of the U.S. population.
Between decennial censuses, the Bureau of the Census estimates the U.S. population from birth and death records and from historical data on immigration rates.3 However, according to the new study, the Census Bureau may have overestimated U.S. population growth since 2000, primarily by assuming too high a rate of legal and illegal immigration to this country.
The authors of the study noted that fewer people are likely to enter the country when the economy is weak and fewer jobs are available, as has been the case for the past few years, a factor not accounted for in the Census estimate of immigration.
In addition, tighter restrictions on immigration since the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks have likely reduced the number of potential workers entering the country.
To the extent that the Census Bureau has overestimated the U.S. population, the job estimates from the household survey will be overstated as well.
This explanation for the household survey's relatively high job estimate is consistent with the fact that during the 1990s, a period during which (we now know) the Census Bureau significantly underestimated net immigration to the United States, employment estimates from the household survey were significantly lower than those based on the payroll survey.4 To summarize, we do not fully understand the differences in employment reported by the payroll and household surveys, and the truth probably lies in between the two series.
However, because of the larger sample used in the payroll survey and because of possible problems with the population estimates used to scale the household survey, somewhat greater reliance should probably be placed on the payroll survey.
Whatever the verdict regarding the relative reliability of the two surveys, their differences should not obscure the fact that the U.S. labor market has been weak.
Indicators of labor market underperformance include (1) the unemployment rate, which remains 1.9 percentage points above its level at the March 2001 peak of the business cycle; (2) a significant decline in labor force participation, particularly among younger workers; (3) the rising share of the unemployed who have been out of work six months or more; (4) the relatively slow decline in initial claims for unemployment insurance, as well as in continuing claims (though both of these have improved a bit lately); (5) the fact that the Conference Board's index of help-wanted advertising remains below the level of the recession trough; and (6) the relatively pessimistic views about prospects for the labor market revealed in surveys of both employers and workers.
(For example, the Conference Board's index of household perceptions of job availability has continued to fall this year and currently is close to the lowest levels since 1993.)
In particular, although various data suggest that layoffs have tapered off significantly, it appears that job creation and hiring remain quite sluggish.
For example, according to new BLS data on employment dynamics, as of the end of 2002, "job losses"--defined as decreases in payroll employment at shrinking establishments--had returned to pre-recession levels.
By contrast, "job gains"--increases in payroll employment at expanding establishments--had not recovered at all.
The Slow Recovery of the Labor Market: Some Possible Explanations Why has the job market remained relatively weak despite strong recent gains in spending and output?
A number of hypotheses have been advanced.
First, some have suggested that firms over-hired during the late 1990s boom, implying that the levels of employment seen before the recession peak in March 2001 were not sustainable.
However, comparisons of the current employment situation with alternative benchmarks do not much change the impression that the recent decline in employment has been unusually severe.
For example, if for the sake of argument we defined sustainable labor market conditions as an unemployment rate of 5 percent and a labor force participation rate equal to its approximate trend value of 67 percent, the level of aggregate employment would still be about 3-1/2 million jobs below the "sustainable" level.
Second, some observers have pointed to increases in benefit costs to employers as a factor retarding hiring.
Benefit costs incurred by private employers have grown rapidly in recent years.
For example, according to the Employment Cost Index (ECI), benefit costs rose more than 11 percent, compared to wage and salary increases of about 6 percent, between September 2001 and September 2003.
The main sources of this increase are health insurance costs, which rose more than 20 percent over that period (despite some efforts of employers to shift those costs back to employees) and pension costs, particularly the costs of funding defined-benefit pension plans.
The increase in benefits costs is a negative factor for employment and may help to explain why firms have worked so assiduously to increase the productivity of existing workers rather than hire new ones.
However, I suspect that benefits costs are not the major explanation of the hiring slowdown.
Employers appear to have partly recouped health and pension costs by raising wages more slowly and by reducing other parts of the benefits package.
In addition, employers who were deterred from permanent hiring by rising benefits costs would be expected to increase workweeks of existing workers and make greater use of temporary workers; but workweeks have not yet increased and the use of temporary workers has grown thus far only to a moderate extent.5 Finally, although underfunded pension plans have been a headache for many employers, the share of private-sector workers in defined benefit plans is only about 20 percent and falling, and many newly hired workers would not be eligible for such plans.
Thus, for the typical company, pension costs at least (as opposed to the costs of health insurance) are unlikely to have had a large effect on the marginal cost of hiring a new worker.
A third explanation for the slowness of firms to begin hiring is that an elevated level of political and economic uncertainty has made firm managers more hesitant to expand their businesses.
Among the obvious sources of uncertainty are the September 11 attacks and their aftermath, including the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq; the accounting and corporate governance scandals that came to light in the summer of 2002; and lingering concerns about the durability of the economic recovery.
The uncertainty hypothesis has a ring of truth, I believe, and it is consistent with the facts that business capital investment has only recently begun to pick up and that inventories are still being liquidated.
However, the observations that workweeks have not risen and temporary employment have risen only modestly, already noted in connection with the cost-of-benefits explanation, is a bit of evidence against the uncertainty explanation as well.
If firms needed more labor services but were reluctant to commit to new hiring, one would expect to see them lengthening workweeks and hiring temporary workers in large numbers, measures that increase labor input but are also easier to reverse.6 A fourth explanation for the slow recovery of employment is that much of the employment loss is the result of an increased pace of structural change in the U.S. economy.
Structural change implies the permanent contraction of certain industries.
Although one would expect jobs lost in declining industries to be replaced eventually with jobs in growing industries, this process is likely to be protracted, because it takes time for new jobs to be created and for workers to relocate and retrain.
There can be no doubt that the U.S. economy is undergoing structural change and that this change has important implications for the labor market.
One might ask, however, whether the pace of structural change has been noticeably higher recently than in the past.
In support of the structural change hypothesis, Groshen and Potter (2003) have pointed out that the great majority of layoffs in the past few years have been explicitly permanent, not temporary.
They have also noted that many of the industries that lost jobs during the recent recession continue to lose jobs, whereas many industries that gained jobs during the recession continue to gain jobs.
These facts are suggestive but not conclusive.
Permanent layoffs were far greater than temporary layoffs in the 1990-91 recession as well, but job growth returned more quickly in that episode than in the present one.
The fact that industries that lost jobs in the 2001 recession continue to lose jobs is consistent with structural change, but it is also consistent with a slow job-market recovery occurring for other reasons.7 To explore the structural change hypothesis further, I find it useful to think more specifically about what types of structural change may have begun to occur more quickly in recent years--particularly in the manufacturing sector, which has borne the brunt of the job loss since 2001.
Factors that have certainly contributed to structural change in manufacturing is globalization and changing trade patterns.
As you know, the U.S. trade balance has deteriorated significantly in recent years, and a disproportionate part of the change in trade flows has taken place in manufactured goods.
(Services, too, have been affected, particularly through the outsourcing of jobs abroad; but for concreteness, I focus here on the quantitatively more important case of manufacturing.)
Currently, about 26 percent of the value of manufactured goods consumed in the United States is produced abroad, up about 5 percentage points since early 1999 and about twice the level of the early 1980s.
The share of domestic manufacturing production that is exported is about 16 percent, roughly 2 percentage points below its peak in early 2001 but about the same level that prevailed in the late 1990s.
Therefore, in the trade area, the major change since the late 1990s appears to be an increased propensity of Americans to buy foreign-made goods, particularly consumer goods, as opposed to a loss of foreign markets for domestic producers.8 Compared with the hypothetical scenario in which domestic and foreign demands for manufactured goods are held constant but in which import and export shares are set to their 1999 levels, this shift in trade patterns can be argued to have cost the United States a significant number of manufacturing jobs--according to some private-sector estimates, perhaps a third of the total lost since the recession began.9 At this point in the debate, one usually hears two opposing views.
On one side, economists generally point out the benefits of free trade to the economy as a whole, which in principle outweigh the short-run costs borne by workers and firms in industries hurt by trade competition.
Certainly, those who stress the costs of trade to domestic manufacturers are prone to overlook its very substantial benefits to domestic consumers, exporters, importers of intermediate goods, and investors.
On the other side, manufacturers and union leaders typically argue that free trade is all very well in theory, but the real world is messy and involves many deviations from economists' idealized views.
