As always, the views I will be expressing are my own and do not necessarily represent those of the other members of the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee.
My last formal speech on the economy was in November 2002.
And in preparing my remarks for today, I was struck both by how much has happened over the past year and by how much economic conditions have changed.
Think back to the economic situation of a year ago.
After growing moderately over the first three quarters of 2002, the economy was about to stall out.
The lingering effects of the corporate governance scandals, rising oil prices, and growing uncertainties about the economic consequences of a possible war in Iraq were holding back the nascent recovery from the 2001 recession.
The pessimism that had gripped the business community since the summer of 2000 intensified, and firms renewed their focus on restructuring rather than expanding their operations.
The result was another round of job cuts and continued sluggishness in capital spending.
Intense geopolitical risks and uncertainties continued to weigh on the economy until major combat operations in Iraq ended this past spring.
Shortly thereafter, the Congress enacted additional reductions in personal income taxes and extended the enhanced corporate expensing provisions for new investment.
Moreover, the Federal Reserve eased monetary policy an additional 25 basis points in June.
By early this summer, a significant amount of monetary and fiscal stimulus was in place, and although there was no evidence in hand at the time, most forecasters anticipated a step-up in the pace of economic activity.
In the event, the economy rebounded faster than even the most optimistic of prognosticators had predicted.
Real gross domestic product rose at an annual rate of 3-1/4 percent in the second quarter of this year and surged at a rate of more than 7 percent in the third quarter.
The labor market, which heretofore had continued to deteriorate, appears to have stabilized during the summer, and almost 300,000 new jobs were created over the July-to-October period.
Although the economy now appears to have turned the corner, much additional progress needs to be made before our country's labor and capital resources are fully utilized.
Indeed, until the most recent employment report, many commentators had described this period as the "jobless recovery."
Since the cyclical trough in November 2001, nonfarm payrolls have actually fallen 1/2 percent.
This decline compares with a 1-1/4 percent rise over a period of comparable length in the preceding jobless recovery from the recession of 1990-91 and an average 7 percent increase in the other seven post-war recovery periods.
A similar picture emerges for industrial production, which is up only 2 percent from its cyclical trough, compared with 6-1/2 percent in 1990-91 and almost 20 percent on average after the other seven post-war recessions.
Are Jobless Recoveries Now the Norm?
These developments are striking departures from past cyclical behavior, and they raise the question of whether some facet of the U.S. economy has changed.
Given the very slow employment growth in the two years after the past two recessions, should we consider "jobless recoveries" to be the new norm?
Proponents of this view cite the widespread cost cutting and restructuring that has occurred in the past two recoveries, the continuing outsourcing of jobs overseas, and an ongoing focus of business decision makers on improving efficiency rather than expanding capacity.
