The question asked of this panel is, "What have we learned since October 1979?"
The evidence suggests that we have learned quite a bit.
Most notably, monetary policy-makers, political leaders, and the public have been persuaded by two decades of experience that low and stable inflation has very substantial economic benefits.
This consensus marks a considerable change from the views held by many economists at the time that Paul Volcker became Fed Chairman.
In 1979, most economists would have agreed that, in principle, low inflation promotes economic growth and efficiency in the long run.
However, many also believed that, in the range of inflation rates typically experienced by industrial countries, the benefits of low inflation are probably small--particularly when set against the short-run costs of a major disinflation, as the United States faced at that time.
Indeed, some economists would have held that low-inflation policies would likely prove counterproductive even in the long run, if an increased focus on inflation inhibited monetary policy-makers from responding adequately to fluctuations in economic activity and employment.
As it turned out, the low-inflation era of the past two decades has seen not only significant improvements in economic growth and productivity but also a marked reduction in economic volatility, both in the United States and abroad, a phenomenon that has been dubbed "the Great Moderation."
Recessions have become less frequent and milder, and quarter-to-quarter volatility in output and employment has declined significantly as well.
The sources of the Great Moderation remain somewhat controversial, but as I have argued elsewhere, there is evidence for the view that improved control of inflation has contributed in important measure to this welcome change in the economy (Bernanke, 2004).
Paul Volcker and his colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee deserve enormous credit both for recognizing the crucial importance of achieving low and stable inflation and for the courage and perseverance with which they tackled America's critical inflation problem.
I could say much more about Volcker's achievement and its lasting benefits, but I am sure that many other speakers will cover that ground.
Instead, in my remaining time, I will focus on some lessons that economists have drawn from the Volcker regime regarding the importance of credibility in central banking and how that credibility can be obtained.
As usual, the views I will express are my own and are not necessarily shared by my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System.
Volcker could not have accomplished what he did, of course, had he not been appointed to the chairmanship by President Jimmy Carter.
In retrospect, however, Carter's appointment decision seems at least a bit incongruous.
Why would the President appoint as head of the central bank an individual whose economic views and policy goals (not to mention personal style) seemed, at least on the surface, quite different from his own?
However, not long into Volcker's term, a staff economist at the Board of Governors produced a paper that explained why Carter's decision may in fact have been quite sensible from the President's, and indeed the society's, point of view.
Although the question seems a narrow one, the insights of the paper had far broader application; indeed, this research has substantially advanced our understanding of the links among central bank credibility, central bank structure, and the effectiveness of monetary policy.
Insiders will have already guessed that the Board economist to whom I refer is Kenneth Rogoff, currently a professor of economics at Harvard, and that the paper in question is Ken's 1985 article, "The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary Target" (Rogoff, 1985).1 The insights of the Rogoff paper are well worth recalling today.
Rather than considering the paper in isolation, however, I will place it in the context of two other classic papers on credibility and central bank design, an earlier work by Finn Kydland and Edward Prescott and a later piece by Carl Walsh.
As I proceed, I will note what I see to be the important lessons and the practical implications of this line of research.2 Central bankers have long recognized at some level that the credibility of their pronouncements matters.
I think it is fair to say, however, that in the late 1960s and 1970s, as the U.S. inflation crisis was building, economists and policymakers did not fully understand or appreciate the determinants of credibility and its link to policy outcomes.
In 1977, however, Finn Kydland and Edward Prescott published a classic paper, entitled "Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans" (Kydland and Prescott, 1977), that provided the first modern analysis of these issues.3 Specifically, Kydland and Prescott demonstrated why, in many situations, economic outcomes will be better if policymakers are able to make credible commitments, or promises, about certain aspects of the policies they will follow in the future.
"Credible" in this context means that the public believes that the policymakers will keep their promises, even if they face incentives to renege.
In particular, as one of Kydland and Prescott's examples illustrates, monetary policy-makers will generally find it advantageous to commit publicly to following policies that will produce low inflation.
If the policymakers' statements are believed (that is, if they are credible), then the public will expect inflation to be low, and demands for wage and price increases should accordingly be moderate.
In a virtuous circle, this cooperative behavior by the public makes the central bank's commitment to low inflation easier to fulfill.
In contrast, if the public is skeptical of the central bank's commitment to low inflation (for example, if it believes that the central bank may give in to the temptation to overstimulate the economy for the sake of short-term employment gains), then the public's inflation expectations will be higher than they otherwise would be.
Expectations of high inflation lead to more-aggressive wage and price demands, which make achieving and maintaining low inflation more difficult and costly (in terms of lost output and employment) for the central bank.
Providing a clear explanation of why credibility is important for effective policymaking, as Kydland and Prescott did, was an important step.
However, these authors largely left open the critical issue of how a central bank is supposed to obtain credibility in the first place.
Here is where Rogoff's seminal article took up the thread.4 Motivated by the example of Carter and Volcker, Rogoff's paper showed analytically why even a president who is not particularly averse to inflation, or at least no more so than the average member of the general public, might find it in his interest to appoint a well-known "inflation hawk" to head the central bank.
The benefit of appointing a hawkish central banker is the increased inflation-fighting credibility that such an appointment brings.
The public is certainly more likely to believe an inflation hawk when he promises to contain inflation because they understand that, as someone who is intrinsically averse to inflation, he is unlikely to renege on his commitment.
As increased credibility allows the central bank to achieve low inflation at a smaller cost than a non-credible central bank can, the president may well find, somewhat paradoxically, that he prefers the economic outcomes achieved under the hawkish central banker to those that could have been obtained under a central banker with views closer to his own and those of the public.
Appointing an inflation hawk to head the central bank may not be enough to ensure credibility for monetary policy, however.
As Rogoff noted in his article, for this strategy to confer significant credibility benefits, the central bank must be perceived by the public as being sufficiently independent from the rest of the government to be immune to short-term political pressures.
Thus Rogoff's proposed strategy was really two-pronged: The appointment of inflation-averse central bankers must be combined with measures to ensure central bank independence.
These ideas, supported by a great deal of empirical work, have proven highly influential.5 Indeed, the credibility benefits of central bank autonomy have been widely recognized in the past twenty years, not only in the academic literature but, far more consequentially, in the real-world design of central banking institutions.
