I would like to focus my remarks on several issues the Trustees' Constitution Committee has identified for further consideration.
These issues were posted to the IASB web site on March 22, 2004.
The IASCF selected these issues after reviewing the comments it received following the publication of its November 2003 consultation document Identifying Issues for the IASC Foundation Constitution Review.
The Federal Reserve has been working to promote common high-quality accounting standards around the world, with a focus on the global standards-setting activities of the IASB.
The goal of common global accounting standards will require a high degree of convergence between U.S. and international standards, and efforts toward full commonality are well under way.
The potential financial stability benefits are significant--high-quality global accounting standards can lead to enhanced transparency, which will, in turn, improve market discipline and foster stable financial markets.
I believe that your efforts and this constitutional review are very important because they will lead to more effective oversight and expert advisory arrangements that will help ensure that high-quality international standards will be developed based on sound principles and appropriate due process, and in a manner consistent with the public interest.
Addressing The Challenges Facing Small- and Medium-Sized Entities The first question raised by the Trustees' Constitution Committee's document was whether the objectives of the IASC Foundation should expressly refer to the challenges facing small- and medium-sized entities (SMEs).
The committee has been considering some specific mention in the constitution of the special needs of SMEs and emerging economies.
A specific objective of this nature would help to ensure that appropriate attention is given to the implementation of international standards by SMEs and emerging-market economies.
In addition, I encourage an appropriate involvement of people with such backgrounds in the advisory groups and organization of the IASCF and IASB.
The committee has also indicated that it recognizes that educational activities could play a role in reinforcing these objectives and that special mention of the organization's educational efforts could be included in the constitution.
I support the inclusion of such language directly into the constitution since this would highlight the IASCF's recognition and commitment to more comprehensively address the implementation needs of important constituents.
Number of Trustees and Their Geographical and Professional Distribution Another issue raised for this review was the number of trustees and their geographical and professional distribution.
The committee is considering changing the geographical-distribution term Asia/Pacific to Asia/Oceania to reflect the fact that North American countries on the Pacific Ocean were not meant to be considered as part of this grouping.
In addition, the committee is considering expanding the number of trustees to provide more representation from the Asia/Oceania region and emerging-market economies.
The committee is considering expanding the number of trustees from nineteen to twenty-two, with six trustees each being appointed from North America, Europe, and the Asia/Oceania region and four trustees being appointed from any area, subject to an established overall geographical balance.
I support the clarity provided by the new term Asia/Oceania, and I strongly encourage a balanced distribution of trustees between all geographic regions.
I also support the appointment of trustees from emerging-market economies because such appointments would give these economies a voice and strengthen their commitment to high-quality accounting standards.
However, I do have concerns about the continued effectiveness of the trustees if their numbers are unduly expanded.
Therefore, although some limited expansion could always be considered, on balance I would prefer to see a reallocation within the existing numbers, over time, as the existing trustees' terms of office come to an end.
The committee believes that the trustees should remain responsible for the selection of new trustees when vacancies arise, and the committee notes that the trustees have advertised the need for applicants for all vacant positions.
It has been pointed out that the trustees have consulted with the relevant organizations in the region where the vacancies arose in order to achieve an appropriate balance of professional backgrounds.
In addition, the committee suggests that the requirements regarding professional backgrounds should be relaxed and that the following language should be added to the constitution: The Trustees shall be comprised of individuals that as a group provide an appropriate balance of professional backgrounds, including auditors, preparers, users, academics, and other officials serving the public interest.
To achieve such a balance, Trustees should be selected after consultation with international organizations of auditors, preparers, users and academics.
Organizations consulted shall include the International Federation of Accountants and national and international bodies representing preparers, users, and academics.
The Trustees shall establish procedures for inviting suggestions for appointments from these relevant organizations and for allowing individuals to put forward their own names, including advertising vacant positions.
I support the broad thrust of this revision.
