It is a pleasure to address a group of organizations committed to improving the lives of low- and moderate-income Americans and strengthening communities.
I am especially pleased to be with you in 2017, which marks the 40th anniversary of the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA).
As you know, the CRA requires banks to help meet the credit needs of the communities they are chartered to serve, including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods.
Since its enactment, the CRA has helped channel capital into communities and, in the process, supported innovative and effective approaches to community development.
We at the Federal Reserve take our CRA responsibilities seriously.
We evaluate the CRA performance of the state-chartered banks we supervise and make the ratings and written evaluations public.1 We currently are improving our examination procedures and examiner training.
We also work with our fellow bank regulators to continually improve our implementation of the law.
And, as many of you know, we recently revised our interagency guidance to clarify how various community development activities are considered in assessing CRA performance, among them workforce development, which is my topic today.2 Workforce Development Initiatives and Challenges Workforce development is a bit of a catchall phrase encompassing different types of initiatives that help prepare people for jobs by providing them with training, placement assistance, and other support.
Organizations dedicated to providing workforce development are interested not just in helping people secure any jobs, but jobs that pay well, provide benefits, offer opportunities for advancement, and are less likely to be eliminated during economic downturns.
Significant job market changes in recent years, brought about by global competition and technological advances--and the new and shifting skills that these changes demand--make workforce development more important than ever before.
As community development practitioners, you know that good-paying, stable jobs are not only important to workers and their families, but also are the foundation of strong neighborhoods.
As part of our CRA responsibilities, the Federal Reserve, together with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, has made it clear that banks will receive CRA recognition for lending to, investing in, and providing services to workforce development initiatives.
In fact, two Federal Reserve Banks recently published a framework describing how workforce development initiatives can fit within a bank's broader CRA strategy.3 While the job market for the United States as a whole has improved markedly since the depths of the financial crisis, the persistently higher unemployment rates in lower-income and minority communities show why workforce development is so essential.
For instance, unemployment rates averaged 13 percent in low- and moderate-income communities from 2011 through 2015, compared with 7.3 percent in higher-income communities.4 The challenges for workers in minority communities are even greater.
The average unemployment rate across all census tracts where minorities made up a majority of the population averaged 14.3 percent from 2011 through 2015.
Also, a much smaller share of the prime working-age population in these areas is employed--67.7 percent during this period, which is nearly 9 percentage points lower than in communities with smaller minority populations.5 These elevated unemployment rates and depressed employment-to-population ratios underscore the strong need for effective workforce development options for these communities.
Education as a Workforce Development Strategy Probably the most important workforce development strategy is improving the quality of general education.
The rapid rise in U.S. education levels in the 20th century, facilitated by the growing availability of high school education in the first part of the century and the rapid expansion of public universities after World War II, contributed enormously to the broad-based economic gains associated with that period.6 But, unfortunately, for a wide variety of reasons that are beyond the scope of this talk, education levels have historically lagged in low- and moderate-income communities, particularly communities of color.
Between 2011 and 2015, the average proportion of adults in low- and moderate-income communities who had dropped out of high school was 23.5 percent, which is more than double the 10.9 percent rate in higher-income communities during that period.7 When students from low- and moderate-income families do complete high school, they are less likely to pursue a college degree.
And when they do attend college, those students are less likely to graduate.8 Among the reasons for the disparity are a lack of money to pay for college and the burden of family responsibilities.9 As a result, the proportion of adults in low- and moderate-income communities from 2011 through 2015 who had a four-year college degree or graduate degree was about half the share in higher-income communities--17.6 percent versus 34 percent.10 This educational disparity matters because, among many reasons, people with less education experience both higher unemployment and lower average earnings.
In December 2016, for example, the unemployment rate for people aged 25 and older with a bachelor's or higher degree was only 2.6 percent.
However, the rate was nearly double, 5.1 percent, for workers in this age group with only a high school diploma and about triple, 7.9 percent, for those without a high school degree.11 While high school graduates earn somewhat more than people who did not finish high school, the big payoff comes with a four-year college or advanced degree.12 The advantages of higher education, evidenced by lower unemployment rates and higher earnings, are clear across the spectrum but are greater for non-Hispanic whites than for African Americans and Hispanics.
Improving educational levels in low- and moderate-income communities is a long-term task.
At least partially because of a lack of early childhood education and the sometimes lower quality of schools, children in these neighborhoods score substantially lower on standardized tests and drop out of high school at higher rates.13 Thus, a starting point is to improve access to quality education in early childhood and improve the quality of primary and secondary schooling.
We must also recognize and address the barriers faced by low- and moderate-income students trying to attain higher levels of education--barriers not typically faced by their more well-off peers.
First, these students often do not have friends or family who have achieved higher educational levels, which matters because students whose parents did not attend college are much less likely to pursue a college degree themselves.14 Even so, these students can benefit from high school counselors or other mentors who can assist them in choosing schools that provide the financial and counseling support that will help them complete their degrees.
And they can benefit from help in picking majors and degrees that lead to higher earnings.15 Second, lower-income students often pursue their education while working to support themselves and family members.
Educational programs that help students balance these competing responsibilities go a long way to improving completion rates.
In recognition of this fact, the U.S. Department of Education is offering competitive grants to postsecondary institutions to support or establish campus-based childcare programs primarily serving the needs of low-income students.16 I want to reiterate that addressing the particular barriers standing in the way of lower-income students attending college and earning a degree requires a long-term strategy.
However, not every student wants a two- or four-year degree or will have the financial wherewithal to pursue and complete a postsecondary degree.
To support programs aimed at students not bound for college, in 2015, the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Cleveland, and Atlanta identified occupations with above-average wages for workers without a bachelor's degree in the country's 100 largest metropolitan areas.17 The Reserve Banks made this information available to workforce development providers online and in workshops.
Educational programs and training that lead to better paying and more steady work are crucial for people without college degrees, particularly lower-income workers.
Workforce Development Programs in Action In the rest of my remarks, I would like to highlight some examples of successful initiatives that illustrate key features of effective workforce development.18 As you know, within our community affairs offices, the Federal Reserve devotes considerable effort to studying and promoting effective workforce development, so I am able to draw on the knowledge and experience of our staff.
In discussing the examples, I would like to make five points.
First, it is crucial for younger workers to establish a solid connection to employment early in their work lives.
The Federal Reserve's 2013 Survey of Young Workers found that 18- to 30-year-olds with early work experience were more likely to emerge from the recent recession with a permanent job.19 Other studies have found that students who worked 20 hours per week in their senior year of high school earned higher wages later in life than those who did not, and that summer youth employment programs improved participants' attitudes toward their communities, raised their academic aspirations, and boosted their job readiness skills.20 The findings point to some of the reasons that the Boston Fed decided to lend technical support to a pilot program called Pocket Change, which aims to reduce unemployment among low-income 18- to 24-year-olds in Somerville, Massachusetts, through internships, training in job skills, and reinforcement of important soft skills such as punctuality and effective communication.
In its first two years, the initiative trained 53 low-income young people and placed 20 of them in jobs.
The results of this modest program indicate the promise of efforts that focus on first-time work experiences, and Somerville is now seeking to expand the initiative.21 My second observation is that career and technical education (CTE) programs, which have seen a revival in recent years, have considerable potential.
For some time, vocational education had fallen out of favor or was in decline in the United States, as it was associated with the deleterious practice of "tracking" less advantaged students that denied them the opportunity for the best education.
But more recently, CTE has been refined and has made a comeback as an effective way to help non-college-bound workers gain valuable skills and obtain a foothold in a labor market that increasingly requires technical proficiency.
These programs teach the skills needed to pursue careers in fields such as construction, manufacturing, health care, information technology, hospitality, and financial services.
This point brings me to my third observation, which is that effective CTE programs and other workforce development initiatives are able to match education and training to good-paying jobs when they actively engage employers in the training process.
WorkAdvance, a regional sector-specific program, is a good example.
It delivers an array of aligned services to meet local business needs and provide jobs for unemployed and low-income adults in multiple cities.22 An evaluation of the program last year in Tulsa, New York City, and northeast Ohio found it was especially effective because it offered training for in-demand skills and industry-recognized certifications, and it focused on jobs that have clear paths for advancement.23 A fourth observation is that apprenticeships, which are more common in other countries, could play a larger role for low- and moderate-income individuals in our country as part of broader career and technical education efforts.
For instance, a state-run program in South Carolina, Apprenticeship Carolina, helps employers develop apprenticeships at no cost to them.
Businesses receive a $1,000 annual tax credit per apprenticeship, and the program assists them with information and technical needs, paperwork, and the integration of classroom learning at local technical colleges.
The program has led to sizable job gains at a modest cost to the state.24 Similarly, Washington State registered apprenticeship programs contributed to substantial long-term increases in employment rates and hourly wages.25 My fifth and final observation is that promoting entrepreneurship could play a greater role in workforce development.
Entrepreneurship is a fundamental strength of the American economy, and owning your own business or working for yourself can offer income, a means of building wealth, and, sometimes, greater flexibility for balancing job and family commitments.
Yet we see less self-employment in low- and moderate-income communities.26 Moreover, when businesses are owned by minorities, they are less likely to have paid employees.27 These findings speak to the opportunities that could be realized by helping people start their own businesses and then helping them grow their businesses.
Programs that equip people with the management skills and knowledge they need to start and operate a successful small business can help.
Relevant and effective training can reduce the failure rate of businesses by helping owners make better decisions and avoid costly mistakes.28 These programs are especially critical in low-income and rural communities where other resources to support small business development may be scarce.
As part of their community affairs work, several Federal Reserve Banks have small business development initiatives.
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York organized a small business protection and education series last year in partnership with the Brooklyn Chamber of Commerce and a local development corporation.
Participants learned about capital resources available to small businesses, online credit alternatives for small businesses, and the risks of handling large volumes of cash.
In another example, the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City developed a guide to help rural and smaller metropolitan communities promote conditions favorable to growing local businesses rather than relying only on efforts to attract large companies.29 Of course, in addition to training, small business owners need financing.
But, as many of you know, factors such as lack of a credit history or a poor credit history and limited collateral--for example, home equity--make it difficult for the owners of small enterprises to access traditional business credit.
This situation is true for many minority, women, and low-income borrowers.30 Nontraditional lenders, including more than 1,000 Community Development Financial Institutions around the country, help fill the gap.31 Conclusion To conclude, while the economy overall is recovering and the job market has improved substantially since the recession, pockets of persistently high unemployment, as well as other challenges, remain.
Fortunately, programs such as the ones I have highlighted today can help address these challenges in more targeted ways than the Federal Reserve is equipped to do through monetary policy.
I want you to know that we applaud your work, and we thank you for doing all that you do to serve the needs of lower-income communities across the country.
Whether you work to provide affordable housing, homeownership counseling, small business credit and technical support, or workforce development, I hope you know that you have a partner in the Federal Reserve.
In the ways we can, with the different tools we each have, our aim is the same: to make the economy work for the benefit of all Americans.
